---
title: "daily notes"
date: 2026-01-19
---

- WordPress started as a simple blogging platform but today is used as a CMS as well as an application framework. It can power many things such as eCommerce, LMS (this site), membership sites, communities (social networks), and backend for mobile/decoupled applications.
- WordPress can be installed using developer tools like [EasyEngine](https://easyengine.io/), [Laravel Valet](https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/valet), [Local by Flywheel](https://localwp.com/), [Varying Vagrant Vagrants](https://varyingvagrantvagrants.org/) (VVV), and [Lando](https://lando.dev/).

### Layout

- **Toolbar** has links to various administration functions, and is displayed at the top of each Administration Screen. Many Toolbar items expand (flyout) when hovered over to display more information.

- **Main Navigation** menu details each of the administrative functions you can perform. At the bottom of that section is a Collapse menu button that shrinks the menu into a set of icons, or to expands to list them by major function. Within each major function, such as Posts, the sub-menu expands (fly-out) when hovered over, and expands fully if an item clicked.

- In the **work area**, the specific information relating to a particular navigation choice, such as adding a new post, is presented and collected.

- **Footer**, at the bottom of each Administration Screen in light shading, are links to [WordPress](https://wordpress.org/), thanking you for using it, and the **version** of WordPress you have installed is shown.

- **Widget** is a small, modular component that adds a specific feature or piece of content to your website without requiring you to write any code.
	- **Search Bar:** Lets visitors search your site.
	    
	- **Recent Posts:** A list of your latest blog entries.
	    
	- **Social Icons:** Links to your Facebook, Instagram, or X (Twitter) profiles.
	    
	- **Categories/Tag Cloud:** A way for users to browse your content by topic.
	    
	- **Custom HTML/Text:** A blank box where you can add your own message, an advertisement, or a Google Map.

| **Feature**     | **Classic Widgets**                                  | **Blocks**                                       |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| **Primary Use** | Fixed areas like sidebars and footers.               | Building the main content of pages and posts.    |
| **Flexibility** | Limited; usually follows the theme’s style.          | High; you can change colors, fonts, and spacing. |
| **Modern View** | Now managed using the **Block-based Widget Editor**. | Managed via the **Gutenberg Editor**.            |
