---
title: "daily notes"
date: 2026-01-16
---

- `array_key_exists()`
```php
$data = ['username' => 'Ashish', 'bio' => null];

// array_key_exists returns true because the key 'bio' is present
var_dump(array_key_exists('bio', $data)); // Output: bool(true)
```

- `var_dump()`
```php
$user = ["id" => 1, "active" => true];
var_dump($user);
/* Output:
array(2) {
  ["id"]=> int(1)
  ["active"]=> bool(true)
}
*/
```

- `array_push($stack, "Apple", "Raspberry");`: Adds to the end
- `array_unshift()`: Adds to the start
- `$result = array_merge($defaults, $userSettings)` : merge the arrays

- Function Declaration
```php
function functionName() { }
$functionName = function() { };
function functionName ($arg1, $arg2) { }
```

- **`echo`**: Does not have a return value
- **`print`**: Always returns the integer **1**

```php
echo "This ", "is ", "multiple ", "parameters."; // accepts multiple params
$result = print "Hello"; // $result is now
```

- **`include`**: If the file is missing, it generates a **Warning** (`E_WARNING`). The script will **continue** to execute the remaining code.
- **`require`**: If the file is missing, it generates a **Fatal Error** (`E_COMPILE_ERROR`). The script will **stop** immediately.
- `isset()`
```php
$a = "test";
if (isset($a)) {
    echo "var set!";
}
```

- **`$_SERVER`**: Contains information about headers, paths, and script locations.
- **`$_POST`**: Used to collect data submitted via an HTML form with the `method="post"`.
- **`$_COOKIE`**: Used to retrieve values from HTTP cookies.

- **CSP (Content Security Policy)** is an added layer of security used by web developers to detect and mitigate certain types of attacks, including **Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)** and **Clickjacking**.
- **Xdebug** performs **Server-side** debugging and profiling in **PHP**.
- The primary role of `fopen()` is to open a file or a URL and return a **file pointer resource** (often called a "handle"). This resource is then used as a reference by other functions like `fread()`, `fwrite()`, and `fclose()` to perform specific operations on that file.
- Superglobals are always available in all scopes. `echo "Hello, " . $_GET['user'];`
- `error_log()` is used for **background logging**. **Default System Log:** sends the message to the PHP error log defined in your `php.ini` file.
- `file_get_contents()` Reads everything into a **string**.
- `debug_backtrace()` function is a powerful tool used to **generate a PHP backtrace**. It provides a detailed "history" of the function calls that led to the exact point where the function was triggered.
```php
function level3() {
    print_r(debug_backtrace());
}

function level2() {
    level3();
}

function level1() {
    level2();
}

level1();
```
- `mkdir()` is used to create directory in PHP.
- `mysqli_real_escape_string()` function creates a legal SQL string that can be used in an SQL statement. It takes a string and prepends backslashes to characters that could otherwise be misinterpreted by the MySQL database (such as single quotes, double quotes, and backslashes).
- The `mysqli_connect()` function is the primary way to **open a new connection to a MySQL database server** using the MySQL Improved (mysqli) extension in PHP.
```php
$connection = mysqli_connect(host, username, password, dbname, port, socket);
```
- In PHP, a **`try-catch`** structure allows you to "try" a piece of code that might throw an error (an Exception). If an error occurs, the code inside the **`catch`** block is executed to handle it.
- Visibility is strictly defined by these three keywords:
	1. **`public`**: The property or method can be accessed from **anywhere** (inside the class, by child classes, and from external code).
	2. **`protected`**: The property or method can only be accessed **within the class itself and by child classes** (inheritance).
	3. **`private`**: The property or method can **only** be accessed within the specific class that defined it.
- Parameterized queries work by separating the **SQL logic** from the **user data**.
	1. **Preparation**: You send a query "template" to the database with placeholders (like `?` or `:name`) instead of actual values.
	2. **Binding**: You send the user data separately.
	3. **Execution**: The database engine treats the data strictly as **values** and never as part of the executable code. Even if a hacker inputs a malicious command (like `' OR 1=1`), the database simply looks for a user whose name is literally that string.
- The `htmlentities()` function takes a string and converts all applicable characters into HTML entities. For example, it turns a `<` into `&lt;` and a `>` into `&gt;`
- `rmdir()` function is used to remove directory
- `set_exception_handler()`	Sets a user-defined function to handle all uncaught exceptions.
```php
function myGlobalExceptionHandler($exception) {
    // This runs for any exception NOT inside a try-catch
    error_log("Uncaught Exception: " . $exception->getMessage());
    echo "Something went wrong. Our team has been notified.";
}

// Register the handler
set_exception_handler('myGlobalExceptionHandler');

// Throw an exception outside of a try-catch
throw new Exception("Critical Database Failure!");
```
